docs/timescaledb.md, before:

# TSBS Supplemental Guide: TimescaleDB

TimescaleDB is a database built on top of PostgreSQL, utilizing a SQL
interface and RDBMS characteristics. This supplemental guide explains how
the data generated for TSBS is stored, additional flags available when
using the data importer (`tsbs_load_timescaledb`), and additional flags
available for the query runner (`tsbs_run_queries_timescaledb`). **This
should be read *after* the main README.**

## Data format

Data generated by `tsbs_generate_data` for TimescaleDB is serialized in a
"pseudo-CSV" format, along with a custom header at the beginning. The
header is several lines long:
* one line composed of a comma-separated list of tag labels, with the literal string `tags` as the first value in the list
* one or more lines composed of a comma-separated list of field labels, with the hypertable name as the first value in the list
* a blank line

An example for the `cpu-only` use case:
```text
tags,hostname,region,datacenter,rack,os,arch,team,service,service_version,service_environment
cpu,usage_user,usage_system,usage_idle,usage_nice,usage_iowait,usage_irq,usage_softirq,usage_steal,usage_guest,usage_guest_nice

```

Following this, each reading is composed of two rows:
1. a comma-separated list of tag values for the reading, with the literal string `tags` as the first value in the list
1. a comma-separated list of field values for the reading, with the hypertable the reading belongs to being the first value and the timestamp as the second value

An example for the `cpu-only` use case:
```text
tags,host_0,eu-central-1,eu-central-1b,21,Ubuntu15.10,x86,SF,6,0,test
cpu,1451606400000000000,58.1317132304976170,2.6224297271376256,24.9969495069947882,61.5854484633778867,22.9481393231639395,63.6499207106198313,6.4098777048301052,44.8799140503027445,80.5028770761136201,38.2431182911542820
```

---

## `tsbs_load_timescaledb` Additional Flags


### PostgreSQL related

#### `-host` (type: `string`, default: `localhost`)

Hostname of the PostgreSQL server.

#### `-postgres` (type: `string`, default: `sslmode=disable`)

Specifies any connection parameters to pass along as the client
connects to the PostgreSQL server. Values for `dbname`, `host`, and `user`
in the connection string will be overridden with the values from the flags
`-db-name`, `-host`, and `-user`, respectively. See the
[PostgreSQL documentation][conn-str] for more details.

#### `-use-hypertable` (type: `boolean`, default: `true`)

Whether to actually use TimescaleDB's hypertable for storing data. Set to
`false` to measure the insert/write performance of plain PostgreSQL.

#### `-user` (type: `string`, default: `postgres`)

User to use to connect to the PostgreSQL server.

### Tags related

#### `-in-table-partition-tag` (type: `boolean`, default: `false`)
Whether to store the primary key tag as a column in the hypertable. By
default the hypertable just stores the primary key (an int) of the tag set
associated with the reading in the table. However this option can be more
costly for some queries because of the need to do a JOIN. This option will
store the primary tag (first tag in the list of tags in the data format) in
the hypertable so that if most queries are using that as a filter, query
performance can be improved.

#### `-use-jsonb-tags` (type: `boolean`, default: `false`)
Whether to store the tags as a JSONB element in the tags table. By default
tags are stored in separate columns in a metadata table named `tags`, where
each unique set of tags is stored in a separate row. Using this option will
store the tags a JSONB element in `tags` instead. Write performance does not
seem to be dramatically affected by this option, but query performance is
typically better with non-JSONB tags so this defaults to `false`.


### Hypertable related

#### `-chunk-time` (type: `duration`, default `12h`)
Size of each time partition in terms of time. It is expressed as a Golang
time.Duration string, meaning a number followed by a unit abbreviation
(s = seconds, m = minutes, h = hours), e.g., the default `12h` is 12 hours.
This should be adjusted based on the dataset size.

#### `-partitions` (type: `int`, default: `1`)
Number of space partitions for the primary tag. Increasing this from 1 may
be useful for larger number of devices, but further testing is still
needed.


### Index related

#### `-field-index` (type: `string`, default: `VALUE-TIME`)
The format for (any) field indexes, which are additional secondary indexes
on fields in a hypertable. These are used for more performant threshold
queries when the threshold is on a field rather than time, e.g.,
`cpu.usage_user > 90`. The two valid options are:
* `VALUE-TIME` which creates a compound index on `(<field>, time DESC)`
* `TIME-VALUE` which creates a compound index on `(time DESC, <field>)`

(`<field>` is replaced with the actual field name)

#### `-field-index-count` (type: `int`, default: `0`)
Number of secondary indexes to create on measurement fields, with `-1`
signifying to create indexes on *all* fields. While secondary indexes can
increase query performance, they will also increase disk usage and reduce
write performance.

#### `-partition-index` (type: `boolean`, default: `true`)
Whether to create a compound index on the primary tag and time dimension
(i.e., an index on `(tags_id, time DESC)`). Removing this index is likely
to significantly reduce query performance.

#### `-time-index` (type: `boolean`, default: `true`)
Whether to create an index on the time dimension. For datasets with smaller
number of devices (i.e., <100k), this is usually recommended. For a larger
number of devices, `-time-partition-index` is recommended instead.

#### `-time-partition-index` (type: `boolean`, default: `false`)
Whether to create a compound index on the time dimension and the primary
tag (i.e., an index on `(time DESC, tags_id)`).
For datasets with a larger number of devices (i.e., >100k), this is
usually recommended because it increases write performance by
reducing lock contention on nodes in the
B-tree since they are additionally partitioned by `tags_id`.


### Miscellaneous

#### `-hash-workers` (type: `boolean`, default: `false`)
Whether to consistently hash data across the multiple insert workers by the
value of the primary (first) tag. For datasets with larger numbers of
devices, this option helps improve data locality on disk which can lead
to better query performance. For datasets with smaller numbers of devices, it is typically not necessary.

#### `-write-profile` (type: `string`, default: none)
File to output periodic CPU and memory statistics. Useful for understanding
system performance while writing data to the database.

#### `-write-replication-stats` (type: `string`, default: none)
File to output replication statistics. Useful for understanding how long it
takes for data to be written in a replicated setup.

---

## `tsbs_run_queries_timescaledb` Additional Flags

### PostgreSQL related

#### `-hosts` (type: `string`, default: `localhost`)

Comma separated list of hostnames for the PostgreSQL servers. Each server
should contain a full copy/replica of the dataset. Workers are connected
to a server in a round-robin fashion.

#### `-postgres` (type: `string`, default: `sslmode=disable`)

Specifies any connection parameters to pass along as the client
connects to the PostgreSQL server. Values for `dbname`, `host`, and `user`
in the connection string will be overridden with the values from the flags
`-db-name`, `-hosts`, and `-user`, respectively. See the
[PostgreSQL documentation][conn-str] for more details.

#### `-show-explain` (type: `boolean`, default: `false`)

Whether to print out a sample `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` output for the first query
in the set of queries. This will be the only query run and is useful for
understanding the query plan that is being generated for a particular
query type.

#### `-user` (type: `string`, default: `postgres`)

User to use to connect to the PostgreSQL server(s).

[conn-str]: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/10/static/libpq-connect.html

Commit message:

Added connection DB flag to tsbs_load_timescaledb. Flag description is a bit on the longer side but it makes a clear point not to confuse it with a similar flag used for specifying the benchmark database name.

docs/timescaledb.md, after:

# TSBS Supplemental Guide: TimescaleDB

TimescaleDB is a database built on top of PostgreSQL, utilizing a SQL
interface and RDBMS characteristics. This supplemental guide explains how
the data generated for TSBS is stored, additional flags available when
using the data importer (`tsbs_load_timescaledb`), and additional flags
available for the query runner (`tsbs_run_queries_timescaledb`). **This
should be read *after* the main README.**

## Data format

Data generated by `tsbs_generate_data` for TimescaleDB is serialized in a
"pseudo-CSV" format, along with a custom header at the beginning. The
header is several lines long:
* one line composed of a comma-separated list of tag labels, with the literal string `tags` as the first value in the list
* one or more lines composed of a comma-separated list of field labels, with the hypertable name as the first value in the list
* a blank line

An example for the `cpu-only` use case:
```text
tags,hostname,region,datacenter,rack,os,arch,team,service,service_version,service_environment
cpu,usage_user,usage_system,usage_idle,usage_nice,usage_iowait,usage_irq,usage_softirq,usage_steal,usage_guest,usage_guest_nice

```

Following this, each reading is composed of two rows:
1. a comma-separated list of tag values for the reading, with the literal string `tags` as the first value in the list
1. a comma-separated list of field values for the reading, with the hypertable the reading belongs to being the first value and the timestamp as the second value

An example for the `cpu-only` use case:
```text
tags,host_0,eu-central-1,eu-central-1b,21,Ubuntu15.10,x86,SF,6,0,test
cpu,1451606400000000000,58.1317132304976170,2.6224297271376256,24.9969495069947882,61.5854484633778867,22.9481393231639395,63.6499207106198313,6.4098777048301052,44.8799140503027445,80.5028770761136201,38.2431182911542820
```

---

## `tsbs_load_timescaledb` Additional Flags


### PostgreSQL related

#### `-host` (type: `string`, default: `localhost`)

Hostname of the PostgreSQL server.

#### `-postgres` (type: `string`, default: `sslmode=disable`)

Specifies any connection parameters to pass along as the client
connects to the PostgreSQL server. Values for `dbname`, `host`, and `user`
in the connection string will be overridden with the values from the flags
`-db-name`, `-host`, and `-user`, respectively. See the
[PostgreSQL documentation][conn-str] for more details.

#### `-use-hypertable` (type: `boolean`, default: `true`)

Whether to actually use TimescaleDB's hypertable for storing data. Set to
`false` to measure the insert/write performance of plain PostgreSQL.

#### `-user` (type: `string`, default: `postgres`)

User to use to connect to the PostgreSQL server.

#### `--admin-db-name` (type: `string`, default: value of `-user`)

Database to connect to in order to create additional benchmark databases.
By default this is the same as the `user` (i.e., `postgres` if neither is set),
but sometimes a user does not have its own database.

### Tags related

#### `-in-table-partition-tag` (type: `boolean`, default: `false`)
Whether to store the primary key tag as a column in the hypertable. By
default the hypertable just stores the primary key (an int) of the tag set
associated with the reading in the table. However this option can be more
costly for some queries because of the need to do a JOIN. This option will
store the primary tag (first tag in the list of tags in the data format) in
the hypertable so that if most queries are using that as a filter, query
performance can be improved.

#### `-use-jsonb-tags` (type: `boolean`, default: `false`)
Whether to store the tags as a JSONB element in the tags table. By default
tags are stored in separate columns in a metadata table named `tags`, where
each unique set of tags is stored in a separate row. Using this option will
store the tags a JSONB element in `tags` instead. Write performance does not
seem to be dramatically affected by this option, but query performance is
typically better with non-JSONB tags so this defaults to `false`.


### Hypertable related

#### `-chunk-time` (type: `duration`, default `12h`)
Size of each time partition in terms of time. It is expressed as a Golang
time.Duration string, meaning a number followed by a unit abbreviation
(s = seconds, m = minutes, h = hours), e.g., the default `12h` is 12 hours.
This should be adjusted based on the dataset size.

#### `-partitions` (type: `int`, default: `1`)
Number of space partitions for the primary tag. Increasing this from 1 may
be useful for larger number of devices, but further testing is still
needed.


### Index related

#### `-field-index` (type: `string`, default: `VALUE-TIME`)
The format for (any) field indexes, which are additional secondary indexes
on fields in a hypertable. These are used for more performant threshold
queries when the threshold is on a field rather than time, e.g.,
`cpu.usage_user > 90`. The two valid options are:
* `VALUE-TIME` which creates a compound index on `(<field>, time DESC)`
* `TIME-VALUE` which creates a compound index on `(time DESC, <field>)`

(`<field>` is replaced with the actual field name)

#### `-field-index-count` (type: `int`, default: `0`)
Number of secondary indexes to create on measurement fields, with `-1`
signifying to create indexes on *all* fields. While secondary indexes can
increase query performance, they will also increase disk usage and reduce
write performance.

#### `-partition-index` (type: `boolean`, default: `true`)
Whether to create a compound index on the primary tag and time dimension
(i.e., an index on `(tags_id, time DESC)`). Removing this index is likely
to significantly reduce query performance.

#### `-time-index` (type: `boolean`, default: `true`)
Whether to create an index on the time dimension. For datasets with smaller
number of devices (i.e., <100k), this is usually recommended. For a larger
number of devices, `-time-partition-index` is recommended instead.

#### `-time-partition-index` (type: `boolean`, default: `false`)
Whether to create a compound index on the time dimension and the primary
tag (i.e., an index on `(time DESC, tags_id)`).
For datasets with a larger number of devices (i.e., >100k), this is
usually recommended because it increases write performance by
reducing lock contention on nodes in the
B-tree since they are additionally partitioned by `tags_id`.


### Miscellaneous

#### `-hash-workers` (type: `boolean`, default: `false`)
Whether to consistently hash data across the multiple insert workers by the
value of the primary (first) tag. For datasets with larger numbers of
devices, this option helps improve data locality on disk which can lead
to better query performance. For datasets with smaller numbers of devices, it is typically not necessary.

#### `-write-profile` (type: `string`, default: none)
File to output periodic CPU and memory statistics. Useful for understanding
system performance while writing data to the database.

#### `-write-replication-stats` (type: `string`, default: none)
File to output replication statistics. Useful for understanding how long it
takes for data to be written in a replicated setup.

---

## `tsbs_run_queries_timescaledb` Additional Flags

### PostgreSQL related

#### `-hosts` (type: `string`, default: `localhost`)

Comma separated list of hostnames for the PostgreSQL servers. Each server
should contain a full copy/replica of the dataset. Workers are connected
to a server in a round-robin fashion.

#### `-postgres` (type: `string`, default: `sslmode=disable`)

Specifies any connection parameters to pass along as the client
connects to the PostgreSQL server. Values for `dbname`, `host`, and `user`
in the connection string will be overridden with the values from the flags
`-db-name`, `-hosts`, and `-user`, respectively. See the
[PostgreSQL documentation][conn-str] for more details.

#### `-show-explain` (type: `boolean`, default: `false`)

Whether to print out a sample `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` output for the first query
in the set of queries. This will be the only query run and is useful for
understanding the query plan that is being generated for a particular
query type.

#### `-user` (type: `string`, default: `postgres`)

User to use to connect to the PostgreSQL server(s).

[conn-str]: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/10/static/libpq-connect.html
